# Generating a board

The first step is to generate a solved board from which individual fields can be removed to create a puzzle.

## Trivial things about solved boards

- A board needs to be `n×n` in size where `n` is a positive even integer number.
- Half of the fields are ones and the other half are zeros, their ratio is always 50:50

## Generating a solved board

### Small boards

#### 2×2

A `2×2` board is fairly straightforward: the board has `4` total fields, half of it are ones, the number of possible
valid boards are `4 [choose](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binomial_coefficient) 2` = `6`

```
00  01  11  10  10  01
11  01  00  10  01  10
```

> TODO: how many fields can be removed from a `2×2` board which would leave room for a single solution?

#### 4×4

The same formula doesn't work with `4x4`, because `16 choose 4` would also include having more than 2 of the same
fields next to each other, like the one below:

```
1111
1111
0000
0000
```

Here we can simplify the question of how many valid boards there are by asking how many versions a single row
there are. When taking into accound that a row of 4 must contain 2 ones and 2 zeros then there are 6 possible
ways we can have those arranged:

```
// by rotating the row to the left (ROL)
0011
0110
1100
1001

// by inverting all the fields (INV)
0101
1010
```

A board needs to be generated by these rows alone.

> TODO: how to choose 4 of the 6 above possible rows to form a board? (with or without using repetition)

### Larger boards

Generating a board larger than `4×4` is not so trivial, but there is a method which can generate all valid
rows adhearing to the rules of not having more than 2 of the same fields next to each other and having the
same amount of ones and zeros:

First start with an alternating block of `01` and fill the row with it. For a `6×6` board a single row would
look like this:

```
01 01 01
```

Each block can be normal or flipped and the previously created row is when all blocks are in normal state.

Write down all possible variations of these blocks: normal (`N`) and flipped (`F`)

```
N N N - 01 01 01
N N F - 01 01 10
N F N - 01 10 01
N F F - 01 10 10
F N N - 10 01 01
F N F - 10 01 10
F F N - 10 10 01
F F F - 10 10 10
```

Now rotate all of the above lines to the left or to the right once to get the other combinations:

```
N N N - 01 01 01 - 10 10 10
N N F - 01 01 10 - 10 11 00
N F N - 01 10 01 - 11 00 10
N F F - 01 10 10 - 11 01 00
F N N - 10 01 01 - 00 10 11
F N F - 10 01 10 - 00 11 01
F F N - 10 10 01 - 01 00 11
F F F - 10 10 10 - 01 01 01
```

Notice that the rotated `N N N` line is the same as the non-rotated `F F F` line, so from the rotated column
we can remove the first and the last lines, they are the only duplications:

```
N N N - 01 01 01
N N F - 01 01 10 - 10 11 00
N F N - 01 10 01 - 11 00 10
N F F - 01 10 10 - 11 01 00
F N N - 10 01 01 - 00 10 11
F N F - 10 01 10 - 00 11 01
F F N - 10 10 01 - 01 00 11
F F F - 10 10 10
```

Rewriting those rows under one another will make a list like so:

```
010101
010110
011001
011010
100101
100110
101001
101010
101100
110010
110100
001011
001101
010011
```

This algorithm works for all larger rows, like `8×8` and the formula for the total number of rows that you
will get from this is:

```
2 * 2^(n/2) - 2
```

where n is the number of fields in a row.

> TODO: how to join these rows into a board?
